---
path: "/blog/4-2-2019"
date: "2019-04-02"
title: "Rejected After My First Technical Interview! Part 1: The Phoner"
info: "A review of the phone screen that led to my on-site technical interview."
--- 


# Rejected After My First Technical Interview! Part 1: The Phoner

No, the title is not facetious &mdash; I am legitimately pretty psyched about this. Here's why...

This whole job search thing is daunting. When one reads the tales of absolute dread on reddit about hundreds of job apps, thousands spent on a bootcamp, only to be jobless, bitter, and posting on reddit; it is disturbing to say the least. Of course, as someone in the thick of it (i.e., a self-taught dev with a psych degree looking to break into the industry), there may be an enhanced negativity bias, but it does appear these stories come from real people, with real gits and linkedins and side-projects. These posts speak of such despair and agony that it makes one (viz., me) question whether this whole developer thing is worth pursuing.

That said, I haven't been really applying to developer jobs, because I don't think I am ready yet (even more so because I live in the the "Greater NYC Area," which is quite competitive). In fact, at the time of writing this post, as well as at the time of the interview which is the subject of this post, I applied to a total of eight developer jobs. And much to my surprise, I received a callback for JavaScript engineer position in NYC. 

Anyway, enough waxxing poetic about *moi,* let's get to the information people want.

## The Phoner
I was emailed by the senior engineer saying she liked my portfolio and would like to set up a phone-screen. 

So the soft questions were about why I wanted to be a dev, what I like about coding, etc. Not to be pedantic, but these are questions that you should have brief answers to down-pat, thus I will not talk about it. Now to the technical screen... 

Quick anecdote, it sounded like the interviewer was on speaker in a stair-well. I could barely hear her, but I didn't want to say as much becuase I didn't want her associate my phoner with any negativity &mdash; burdened by a psych degree it seems.

## Technical Questions

*Note: These responses are to the best of my recollection, and I assure you there are not verbatim. That said, I tried to be as factual as possible (i.e., I am not modifying my responses to seem smarter **post facto,** though my use of "post facto" is certainly for those purposes).*

### What is hoisting in JavaScript?
*My Answer* "JavaScript defines functions first so you can reference them before they are declared. For example, in Python if you have a function `getName` and you call it before you declare the `getName` function you will get an error `getName` is not defined."

She accepted this, and it's basically correct. Basically JS will allocate functions in memory first, versus literally "hoisting" functions to the top of the code. Either way, I passed.

### What is the difference between `display: inline` and `display: block`
*My Answer* "Display block elements will have their paddings and margins respected, whereas inline elements will not."

Eh, more or less. Though I am somewhat correct, a more precise answer would be that `block` elements add line-breaks after the element, whereas this is not so with `display: inline` elements.

### What is the difference between `const`, `let`, and `var`?
This ended up snagging me in the on-site &mdash; which I will discuss more in depth in a different post &mdash; but on the phoner I seemed to have done okay. 

*My Answer* "`var` is globally scoped, whereas as `let` is scoped at the function level. Objects instantiated with `const` can not be modified."

Again, sort of wiffed this one. The answer really lies in scoping at the global, functional, and block scope; and how these different scopings affect asynschronous actions and iteract with [closures](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Closures). Nonetheless, she sort of accepted my answer.

### What is the difference between `forEach` and `map`
*My Answer* "`map` will produce a new list, whereas `forEach` modifies the list in place."

This is an abridged version of my actual response. To my recollection, when answering this question I started delving into features of `reduce`, etc. Either way, I believe she accepted my response, but it was far from concise.

### You have an element with an `evenListener` "click" nested within an element with an `evenListener` "click." If you click on the inner element will the `click eventListener` fire?

*My answer.* "Yes, because of the event will bubble up"

### (Continued from the previous question) How do you stop it?

*My answer.* "I don't know."

I was thinking of saying something like `e.preventDefault`, and it turns out this isn't too far from the actual thing, which is `e.stopPropagation()`.

### Select an element with class name "div" 
A gimme at the end, I suppose for self-esteem purposes. The answer is `.div`


## Conclusion

**tldr; they brought me in**

While I didn't get the exact answers, and had no clue about the `stopPropagation()` question, I feel I did okay. In the next post I will talk about the on-site.